What is IPRL and why is it so important?
For most of the history of blockchain,
performance has not been something
that's optimized for, but it's how do we
make this like trusted? How do we build
something that'll slowly change the
paradigm? Are you guys writing your own
client? Are people expected to migrate
to a different client or just change a
few configs to be able to join the
double? The way we sort of are are doing
this is we are not building a validator
client. You also mentioned uh you'll
have to install a bunch of these
switches that HFTs use. So is there a
hardware challenge in what you're
building? So the first one is the
switches. The second one is the physical
fiber in the ground. You actually need
to physically manipulate this fiber
links to form this network, right? And
what does it really mean? Is it like are
you going to take trenches in the ocean
and then connect it or it's like ISPs
with access to back halls? I would say
over the long term our ambition is that
Hello. Hello. Hello. Welcome to another
episode of the devs podcast. Today we
have with us Austin Federa previously of
the foundation now doing what much more
interesting things are in the deep
trenches of actual physical and the data
link layer of what we of what we know as
internet. So welcome to the podcast. Hey
thanks for having me on. Appreciate it.
Awesome.
I I was just reading your paper this
this morning and it was so interesting
to see a call back or you know a call
out to
IDRL. So what is IDRL and why is it so
important? Like why is it so important
to everything that we do as an industry?
Yeah. So, I I think there's a good place
to start with this, which is that for
most of the history of blockchain,
performance has not been something
that's optimized for. Um, and there's
all good reasons for that, right? When
you're building a new system from the
ground up, which is what Ethereum was,
which is what Bitcoin was, the focus is
not necessarily on how do we make this
scalable out to a world layer, but it's
how do we make this like trusted? How do
we build something that'll slowly change
the paradigm? And this is really
important. I don't want to like skip
over that part because I think a lot of
the time people are like, "Oh, Ethereum
is so slow. It does 20 things per
second." And like, yeah, Ethereum is so
slow. It does just 20 things per second.
But it laid the conceptual groundwork
for smart contract networks. And so IBRL
I'd sort of view as like we've had a lot
of this like there's like Gen One
blockchains which are basically Bitcoin,
right? Things that are are just store of
values or simple one asset transfer
systems, right? I I don't want to like
put too much philosophical
uh you know inscription onto what
Bitcoin is because what Bitcoin is
changes every few years. It was digital
gold for a while. It was store of value.
It was you know all these other types of
things. And that's great like one of the
great things about crypto is definitions
change as the market changes. Um you
don't sort of have a bunch of egos
driving oh what is crypto at any given
moment, right? But but that's sort of
important. Then you have the gen 2
things which are things like you know
bit uh Ethereum really falls into that
that category. Uh and then you have this
sort of like amorphously defined like
third generation of blockchains which
includes everything from in some
people's definition polygon to Salana
right and there's a huge amount of
technical differences and ranges between
what that that is. I would sort of say
that like today what we're seeing Salana
like push the forefront of what we're
seeing like monad and mega build towards
now although like caveat being like test
nets are not mainet we don't actually
know what a lot of these systems look
like yet but but these capacity numbers
that we're looking at are like I would
say call it like real third gen
blockchain I'm not sure that when we're
talking about like a few hundred TPS and
you know a 100 validator set or 200
validator set that's not really like
that is basically Remember when like the
cell phone companies were calling things
like 3G plus, right? Like we didn't
really have LTE or 5G yet, but we had
all these like super fast 3G that
weren't really that fast, but were like
a little bit more or like a DSL falls
into that category from like an internet
technology perspective. There's a lot of
really good work that was done sort of I
would say like 2019 to 2023, but it
wasn't really focused on how do you
build systems for performance. It was
focused on how do we get performance out
of systems that were never built for
performance. And the EVM is a perfect
example of this, right? Ethereum gives
you 30 seconds for a block and almost
none of that's focused on compute. Most
of that is like ah Raspberry Pies are
kind of slow and they might be running
on like a phone line somewhere. We got
to give a lot of time for block
propagation. And so, you know, to get
back to your question like what is IBRL
and why why do we focus on this across
the ecosystem? Now, IBRL is this idea
that like the only way you make systems
faster is you make them faster, which
sounds like an obvious statement, but
almost no one who's been focused on
making blockchains faster has actually
been focused on making the blockchain
faster. It's all a bunch of additional
co-processor like, you know, oh, we're
going to zkify this and suddenly we're
going to gain all these performance
increases. That is totally true. And you
can see on Salana like ZK compression,
which is what state compression and
account compression is, it's using zero
knowledge proofs to accelerate a whole
bunch of stuff, that actually makes
things faster and cheaper. But if you're
starting from a base of 20 transactions
per second, the scaling factor is quite
limited compared to if you're starting
the base of Salana or Sooie or Mega E or
Monet or something like that. And so
IBRL is all about going back to the base
layer to making sure that the stuff at
the foundation layer that you're going
to build all these other abstractions
and programming languages and systems on
top of is actually fast. And and this
really started, I would say, with the
Fire Dancer project, um, which was going
to, you know, a non-traditional
engineering shop for blockchain, a
highfrequency trading firm, and saying
like, "Hey, you guys, uh, you know,
there's this there's this old sort of
like adage in in, you know, TRDFI
trading, which is you can be smart or
you can be fast." And if you can only
choose one, you want to be fast, right?
Because smart is like smart is hard,
right? Smart is like RENT and Millennium
Fund. Fast is just engineering. Like you
can have a bunch of like B+ tier quants
and as long as your engineering is the
best in the industry, you're going to
make more money than other people cuz
like you'd rather have, you know, 10
basis points on $300 billion of volume
than like a few magic trades that are
just excellent, right? And so going to a
trading firm and being like you guys
focus on performance like how how do you
look at rewriting a validator client
from a performance first architecture
and one of the things that you know we
found we sat down with a bunch of the
engineers who now today are building
fired dancer is they're like there's a
lot wrong with the Salana codebase from
a performance standpoint but it's the
least wrong of any chain out there so we
feel like we can make a lot of progress
on this like little things like the fact
that you have to specify all the
accounts you want to talk to in a
transaction
huge benefits for performance. Like
otherwise you're dealing with stochastic
modeling and like Monad's gotten into
this where like there is an overhead in
Monad that is very similar to the
overhead in like the Intel like Pentium
4 days of hyperthreading of like at some
point the pipeline is going to guess
wrong and you have to go back up to the
top of that pipelining stage and restart
because you guessed really well but you
guessed wrong. Um, and so that's where
like Salana and the SVM has a really
strong advantage from a foundational
standpoint. That being said, there's
nothing that prevents you from doing
this for Ethereum stuff too. Now, does
Ethereum and does that world maybe have
to get EVM 2.0? I mean, there's a whole
bunch of new stuff going into Mona that
is not in EVM canonical, right? And
that's super interesting to me. There's
a bunch of stuff being done on like Mega
Ether on just inclusion and not cranking
execution. Super interesting. I'd love
to see where that kind of goes in the
future. Um, and you know, with Salana
too, there there's all this work now on
fired dancer zero like IBRL is this
mindset. Um, that you know, I think if
you follow like Alandro on on Twitter,
you see him like posting about like, oh,
we we just like we updated the TPU and
now it can handle 10x more capacity than
it it could in the previous release.
like these optimizations like uh you
know the only the only way you eat an
elephant is one bite at a time. The only
you know Andel's law the only way you
make a system faster is you upgrade
every single component of it and then
the whole thing has this like waterfall
moment of increased performance. So in
in a way when we talk about you know
increase bandwidth and reduce latency I
feel there are two parts to the puzzle.
One is increasing bandwidth when so when
we speak about increasing bandwidth is
it network bandwidth or we speaking
about bandwidth in terms of the number
of transactions you could process that
is number one and reducing latency I I
think that that is we it is reasonably
legible in the sense that you know you
know you you can shave off latency from
every component in in a large
architecture and that's that's legible
but what do we really mean when we say
increasing bandwidth. Yeah. So I think
these mean two different things
depending on which engineer you're
talking to. So 0ero is not a blockchain
strictly speaking. We we are building a
OSI layer 1 2 3 like blockchains are
like 567 right like we're we're building
much lower down in the stack. And what
we are focused on when we talk about
latency is real latency. the time it
takes packets to get from point A to
point B. What we're talking about
bandwidth is real like how fat are the
pipes, not how much block data you
sending over it, but like what is the
the theoretical maximum amount of data
you can pump through this piece of
glass.
Um, and from there that's where all the
software optimizations come back to.
like when we go to IBRL for like let's
say like the fire dancer team or the
agave team or the judo team it means
maybe something a little bit different
so you know we've seen CU limits raised
uh by about 4% like it's not much of a
raise but it's a good start right four
but also 4% every month is a hell of a
lot over compounding not interest but
compounding cus right like we're going
to get a lot more capacity through these
systems soon but when we're talking
about, you know, increasing bandwidth,
uh, from a transaction standpoint,
there's like a bunch of other components
that go into that. So, for example, if
all we do is start increasing block
size, right? Okay, now there's more data
available, great. Can the validators
actually efficiently process that data?
That's a question. Fire dancer can.
Agave is getting there. Um, another
thing as we look through this is what
about all the other stuff that has to
happen? Like people forget about this a
lot when they think about blockchain.
Turbine is like a marvel of modern
distributed system engineering. The fact
that like we have this massive fan out
where shreds are propagated in almost
real time out to the rest of the
network. Uh you know basically when it
hits the MTU size of like the packet
spec for Salana which is like 1358 maybe
I can't remember exactly. It's less than
your standard MTU size to leave some
overhead for some other stuff in it.
Those packets go out like and that fan
out gets state all around the world
incredibly quickly. There's no other
network that is anything like turbine.
But turbine is incredibly bandwith
heavy, right? These nodes are very
gossipy, right? We also have a protocol
called gossip which is pretty gossipy
too. Like the reason we talk about these
things as as problems, if you saw the um
the demo of a fire dancer client with
six nodes globally distributed running a
million TPS, that was about 2.3 GB per
second of data that it was taking up to
do that and a lot of that is like even
on just a six node cluster that's state
propagation too, right? And so when we
look at these types of things, there's
this old sort of adage in engineering
that like which is very similar to
something to used to say which is you
haven't solved scaling if you can't
throw more hardware at it. And like
there is a form of traffic engineering
that like some bandwidth providers go
through where you just throw more
bandwidth at the problem, right? And so
the easiest thing to do is just to say
if we wire up every Salana validator
with a 100 gigabits of connectivity, we
can make no protocol changes and just
start raising limits and things will go
great. But that's not like the right way
to engineer this stuff. So if you go
back to like the HFT space, multiccast
is a technology that's been used for
years now. M multiccast. The the easiest
way to explain multiccast is if you have
a bunch of Sonos speakers or AirPlay
devices or chcasts or something like
that and you want to play music to
multiroom
audio. Your phone is not sending out
five copies of the song that's going to
all of those different speakers. It's
sending out one copy of it and your
router is saying, "Hey, this is a
multiccast feed. Who wants this
multiccast feed?" All the speakers are
saying, "Send me the data. Send me the
data. Send me the data." And so the
replication is handled at the hardware
level. It's not handled at uh you know
the software level. And so we can bring
and multiccast has been used for years
in high frequency trading like firms and
engineering because it's a really good
way to get data to multiple places,
right? The easiest version of this is
like we want two redundant systems. So
we need to send data to the active
system and the two backups, but we don't
want to waste a bunch of time sending
the data three times. So the switch is
just going to replicate that data for
us. And so if one system goes offline,
the backup system already has all the
data because it's been receiving it
throughout the course because it's all
hardware accelerated in the switch. And
it's very very quick and easy to do. We
can do that for things like state
propagation. So instead of a validator
having to fan out and send to a bunch of
different addresses when it builds a
block or sends a packet out, it can just
send that packet to the network
switches. And the switches say, "Oh,
this packet is going to this multiccast
group. We're going to replicate it
automatically across the entire network
and deliver it to everybody who has put
up their hand and say, "Hey, I want
these packets about Salana State
transitions." Now, those packets can be
going to validators. They can be going
to read only endpoints like maybe a Dune
ingest server. So, they're like pulling
data in more quickly. Um, all these
types of things. It also removes one of
the major issues today with turbine
which is it's stake weighted right now
stake weighted turbine makes a ton of
sense if what you're worried about is
building the next block if what you're
worried about is forming a transaction
and sending it on the RPC layer like
good luck you're getting your turbine
data stale now the way around that are
things like shredstream with jetto is
built which you know is basically an
alternative to turbine but you know
shredstream is pushing gigabits per
second of data through when it really
doesn't have to and it is doing this
because it hasn't yet been optimized for
these types of things especially with
multiccast and those sorts of
technologies. So this is a very long
answer to your question about what do we
mean when we talk about increasing
bandwidth. It really depends where you
look at the stack but the way we at
double zero think about this is if you
don't solve the problems as close to the
hardware or in hardware as possible
you're always building on a shaky
foundation. And you know this is this
has been the Salana thesis forever. Uh
this is a a big thesis I was kind of a
big proponent of when I was at the
Salana Foundation which is we should be
building technology in as generalized an
application as possible and as lowlevel
as possible right we shouldn't build
compressed NFTs we should build
compression and then metaplex will build
compressed NFTs right we shouldn't be
building um you know everything for
examp like for example if you go down to
like Salana at its core layer you can
write a front end for LLVM and any type
of programming language you want. That's
super powerful. That means like if Rust
is out of favor in 10 years, someone can
just build a different front end for a
different thing, right? The C tooling
needs a little bit of work. Like there's
lots of there's lots of caveats there,
but there was a whole project for a
while to build a move front end for
Salana, which would not necessitate
adding a second VM to support move. Uh
that's super cool, right? But like this
whole philosophy of like build things as
generic and as low-level as possible,
we've really taken that forward with
double zero and that's why it's a
physical fiber network, right? We're not
talking about like software abstraction
layers and like software routing systems
that don't actually run on the physical
fiber lay layer. We have that stuff too,
but if you don't start with a physical
network, all the rest of it like you're
always running up against a performance
bottleneck of the base layer.
That's awesome.
You you mentioned double zero right
like so when I in in the paper you
mentioned this like two ring
architecture where you have you know an
outer inress and deepest ring and then
there is also an inner data ring. So
is0ero like some kind of an uh metaphor
to these two rings? Oh yeah, totally.
The the the the the name like all bad or
good names you just like eventually call
the code name the product name because
you can't think of anything better. Like
maybe in a few years we'll rebrand. Who
knows? But like I kind of like double
zero. It um it feels different from a
lot of the other industry naming
conventions at this point. So
and and also you were me you were
talking about this
uh for example in increasing bandwidth
by you know p pushing all the data flow
to the hardware level. So is could you
talk a little bit more about like what
really happens in this inner data flow
rink is that where the gossip is
expected to go. Yeah totally.
So today what happens is Salana
validators have and other validators as
well have one IP address, right? Uh
there's a second IP address being added
into the gossip protocol. So validators
can can basically have a inside0ero IP
address and an outside zero IP address.
You can think about this as like they're
they're they're sitting on the border,
right? One leg is in France, one leg is
in Spain. Um, and so the reason we're
doing this this way is is the way that a
validator will actually interface with a
double zero network is not by plugging
in a cable, right, to a switch. Because
at you remember at the end of the day,
this is a physical fiber network. So
there is a physical fiber line going
from a switch through a bunch of things
out connected to other switches
elsewhere in the world. But if you're
running a zero switch and every like one
in the data center is like, hey, can I
plug into the front of it? like it's a
cabling nightmare or it's a whole mess
for from an admin perspective. Um, and
networking technology is a little bit
like printers, right? Like no one ever
wants to touch the printer. Like the
first thing you do if you ever had like
an IT job in like college or high school
is get someone else to deal with the
printer cuz it everyone's like, "Ah,
printers are are it." And you're like,
"No, no, no. Printers are the printers
are different, right?" Like cabling is
the same way, right? It's like all these
like software and high performance
engineers are like, "Yeah, this is
great, but like we really don't want to
touch any cables." So the way around
that is you basically create software
tunnels within the data center or the
environment that the validators are
operating that create a Jerry tunnel
from the validator to the switch. Now in
something like Terra switch that's just
going to be a local network connection
over the LAN effectively the the
internal network of the data center and
so it's super fast. It's not like HFT
firm fast, but we don't care about, you
know, 50 microsconds uh when we're
dealing with these types of things. This
is blockchain. We're still not anywhere
near like that level of care. And so
from the validator perspective, there's
basically two interfaces now. One's the
physical hardware nick and the second is
the tunnel interface. And that tunnel is
how it tra it communicates with the
switch, which is where the tunnel
endpoint basically goes to. Now, these
are not like your normal $200 like
switches you have in your house. These
are like large switches that are, you
know, designed for like these type of
like basically uh, you know, trading
applications. And inside of it, they
have like two large XYlinks FPGAAS. And
the FPGAs will do things like signature
verification in hardware, transaction
dduplication in hardware, and a bunch of
other things in hardware over the long
term. And the nice part is because
they're FPGAAS, not AS6, we can tweak
them and change them over time. uh and
you know evolve what that looks like.
But by offloading the spam protection
layer as well as the transaction
verification layer, what we're we're
making sure is validators are only
receiving basically cleaned and filtered
data. Now spam transactions like there's
a whole definition of a what's a spam
transaction. Our only definition of spam
transaction is is the packet identical
and do the signature if it the packets
identical you throw it out. If the
signatures don't match, you throw it
out. Now, it still could be a spam
transaction in the sense of like it's a
very low economic value transaction.
That's not our job on D0ero to care
about the economic value. It's literally
like is this transaction uh conforming
to the spec that Salana says it needs to
or Ethereum says it needs to or or
whatever kind of comes from there. So,
from the data flow then once you get
into the switch that's when you're
effectively on the zero network. And so
if let's say that I am a validator
broadcasting data out and this is before
multiccast I am communicating over0 the
same way I would effectively communicate
over the internet except instead I know
the the internal zero IP address and the
external IP address of a server and so
you know at that point you're like oh
I'm going to talk to the it on the
fastest connection and so that's going
to always be over at the0ero network if
the other validator is located on0 if
I'm an RPC what I'm doing is I'm sending
traffic in through the0ero network to
get routed to wherever the leader
happens to be at that moment and you
know latency is a is a compounding
advantage I would say so you know right
now in Salana there's a little bit of
round trip that has to go you know
because if I'm sending from an RPC
provider I'm proxying my transaction
through a staked validator that's one
network hop then there's another network
hop to catch up to wherever the leader
is so if we're dealing with you know two
hops at that point If double zero is,
you know, 40% faster, 20% faster, even
10% faster than the public internet over
a given link, that's where you start to
see real advantage in terms of
performance. But the the bandwidth
increasing and the uh the latency
reduction is actually only a part of it.
Like if we really want to be technically
accurate, we're increasing bandwidth,
reducing latency, and reducing jitter.
And jitter is sort of like the silent
killer of high performance systems. Like
people don't think about jitter much.
Jitter is a measurement of uh basically
like the variance in latency time. So if
I ping a server and it's always 100
milliseconds, the lat the jitter is zero
even though the latency is 100. If it
goes between 80 and 150, then the jitter
is super high. And when you're dealing
with really high jitter, what it does is
it it it's like it basically throws
everything out of whack. You can think
about it as like I'm filling like a
semi-trail and I'm like I'm packing
stuff into it. But if if the stuff
you're putting into the truck doesn't
arrive in order, you suddenly need a
giant buffer. You need a whole waiting
area where you can load stuff into the
waiting area before you put it into the
into uh you know the truck. And so if
what we're doing is something like
Salana Turbine, right, where like data
is coming off in real time and folks are
basically rebuilding blocks in real
time. Yeah, you can leave a gap and say,
"Okay, I know I'm missing a piece of
data here. When it arrives, I'll drop it
in in this place." And we have eraser
coding and all sorts of things to make
that like faster on Salana today. But
you know, if everything just arrives in
order, so much time can be saved, like
processing time can be saved. Uh and
that's one of the main advantages of
double zero is the jitter reduction.
That's very cool. Um super interesting.
Uh this seems like so you're building on
top of other blockchains. Um and seems
like it's like another network that
eventually everyone would want to use or
would be forced to use because it'll be
more performed. Um yeah. So my question
is as as a blockchain validator right
now um are you guys writing your own
client? Are people expected to migrate
to a different client or just change a
few configs um to be able to uh join the
zero network? Yeah. So the way we sort
of are are doing this is we are not
building a validator client. Uh we are
working with you know Anza on Agave and
Jetto on their Jetto client and fired
dancer team on the fire dancer client.
Um because we don't need to build our
own client for this, right? Like a lot
of the stuff that we're talking about
there are there's right now our our
conception of how this works and we
actually like we have a private test net
up and running. There's four Salana
mainet validators building blocks
running on d0ero today. We have a a CLI
toolkit that you download and it does a
few different things. So one thing is it
tells the client basically how to talk
to one of these network interfaces. Now
the the tunnel interfaces now that's
getting built into all of the clients so
there won't be like a feature that's
needed but
We actually have the first network that
provisions IP addresses and routing
based on smart contracts that anyone's
ever built. We've done a bunch of
research to make sure this is actually
true, but no one's ever built a network
before where I can obtain an IP address
and I can obtain route access through
smart contract. So, we have a private
cluster of like it is a blockchain, but
like it's not a blockchain anyone would
deploy smart contracts on. It's really
just a distributed ledger. Um but you
interact with a contract and you
basically say hey here's my validator
here's my address here's my validator
identity you create an identity on this
thing of0ero and then it provisions you
an IP address and that IP address
becomes attached to the tunnel and that
is how you interact with with things
through this so you know we are not
looking to um we do not we're not
looking to build a client we don't need
to build a client there's many people
who are much better than us at building
clients. What we're really good at is
this low-level networking work. Um, and
so that's what people will be
interacting with in order to join the
zero network.
Got it. That makes sense. Um, you also
mentioned uh you'll have to install a
bunch of these switches that HFDs use.
So, is there a hardware challenge in
what you're building um or Yeah, there's
two. So, the first one is the switches.
The second one is the physical fiber in
the ground, right? And or running under
the oceans. And so software networks are
are are like sexy and easy because all
you have to do is tell people to install
some software on a
computer. Like that's great, that's
easy, that's nice. Uh we need to
physically get things connected and we
need hardware and we need hardware at
certain locations, right? Hash power for
Bitcoin completely swappable, right?
They're they're completely comparable
goods. Hash power from one minor is just
as good as hash power from another
minor. validation from the Coinbase
validator is just as good as validation
from the Kraken validator or you know
the Chainflow validator or whatever.
That is not the case with D0ero because
this is a physical localitybased
network. This is part of why I've like
harped on dpin for a while about getting
really wishy-washy on like like oh it's
just compute resources like ah it's not
dpin at that point that's just a
blockchain man like I I get it that
you're rendering GPUs and AI workloads
but that's not deepin that's just an
application specific blockchain like
helium is deepen because the location of
the routers and all these other things
like it intricately matters you can't
avoid location when it comes to this
stuff so because bandwidth is not
compatible. I like your bandwidth in
California does me no good if my server
is running in New York. Um, we have to
think about these things in slightly
different ways. So the switches are are,
you know, expensive. They're not cheap.
The fiber is also expensive. It's not
cheap. But we went through this
transition when we moved from, you know,
the idea of like, oh, I can run a
Raspberry Pi in my basement and I can
participate in a network to, you know, I
need to spend $700 a month and get a
server somewhere or I need to build a
server and I have fast enough internet
at home to be able to run it on. All
modern blockchains have extremely high
performance requirements and Salana
actually not the highest requirements.
People think it's like the highest
requirements. It's not like you should
go look at like how heavy like a
validator on another type of network is
uh let alone how heavy a sequencer is.
Um but all these things kind of get back
to this idea that that you do need these
networks built out and it's going to be
something where like we have no
conceptions that like the average normal
user of any blockchain is going to be
able to operate at zero endpoint. These
are things that are going to be run by
professional operators. Uh the same way
that the internet is run by professional
operators. Like you can technically run
your own mail server. No one runs their
own mail server. Everyone just uses
Gmail or Proton Mail or something like
that. Um you know you can technically go
build your own internet and wire up you
know your neighbors and like you know
have your little IRC chats. No one does
that right. And so what we are trying to
do is not make D0ero something that
everyone can run because it's just not
possible today. Maybe in the future with
like satellite clusters it'll be
different. What we're trying to make
sure is is sufficiently censorship
resistant that it has basically the same
resistance profile as the public
internet today. Now that may seem
ambitious, but there's actually only 20
companies that run the tier one ISPs
around the world. If those 20 companies
gang up on you, you are not getting
global transit of data. Now there's lots
of other things. There's Cloudflare
involved in things. There's, you know,
there's lots of other components that go
into that, but at its core, what we are
trying to build is a prioritization
layer and a high performance network for
all high performance distributed
systems. And who knows, someday maybe
that is not exactly a competitor to the
internet, but it's some form of
alternative to the internet.
So ju just to double click on that right
you mentioned uh you mentioned that you
actually need to physically manipulate
this fiber links to form this network
right and what what does it really mean
is it like are you going to dig trenches
in the ocean and then connect it or or
someone already has a is you know yeah
or it's like ISPs with access to black
holes
that you know that
that onboard on to0 sorry not calls back
moments to totally so it's a it's it's a
good question um I would say over the
long term our ambition is that the
foundation probably does own and build
infrastructure
um however you know in the early days
the easiest thing to do is to use excess
capacity so there's two types there's
many types of excess capacity the type
that's most readily available are from
companies that run their own networks
works today. So, lots and lots there
there's thousands of companies that
actually have their own networks,
whether they're global or whether
they're regional is a different
question, but if you look at like a like
a high frequency trading firm, like jump
trading is one of the first contributors
to the zero network, they're
contributing a 10 gigabit slice of their
global data network. Now, their network
is optimized for all sorts of things
internally, but what they're able to do
is segment off just 10 Gbits of that and
hand that over basically to double zero
by installing these switches and setting
policies on on their network for this.
We have other firms, you know,
contributing data as well. Uh we're
getting pretty close to 100 Gbit network
buildout um you know, around the world,
which is more than enough for all of
today's blockchain traffic. Uh we can
get back to to that, you know, as well
in the future. Um we have you know other
types of folks contributing network
capacity as well. We actually are
working with one uh node and network
provider in Europe to build out sort of
European connectivity into a bunch of
cities and data centers across Europe.
Um and so you know when we look at this
now it's a lot of shared infrastructure.
Um over the long term when the economics
of the network are built out enough and
support it we imagine there'll be a lot
more dedicated providers spinning up.
But, you know, these these leases, like
if you're talking about like a monthly
lease on a piece of undersea fiber, that
can be as little as $3,000 a month and
it can be if you want Hibernia, it can
be $300,000 a month. Now, we don't need,
you know, the HFT grade, you know,
fastest out there network links to make
this work. we can use the sort of like
the stuff that's maybe like the second
fastest or third fastest or fourth
fastest provider because it's still way
faster than the public internet and we
solve the jitter problem and we can use
these technologies like multiccast but
yeah you know you fast forward and this
this protocol is worth you know a fifth
of what salon is worth someday maybe and
you know you better believe we're
looking at launching satellite networks
and joining cable consortiums and all
those sorts of things too.
Yeah, this sounds super ambitious and
also extremely hyped about what zero,
you know, what the world will look like
when zero is fully out there. But that I
I think what would be so interesting to
our listeners
is if how do people get involved with
you? Are you hiring for any roles? And
you know, what are your biggest
challenges today that people could step
up and help you on?
Let's see. So I think there's a whole So
there's a whole bunch of different types
of things at different at different
layers of the stack I would say. So one
of the things that is great about
blockchain is we always reinvent the
wheel. One of the things that sucks
about blockchain is we always reinvent
the wheel. So we talk to a lot of
engineers across the board
who really don't know anything about how
high performance networking works,
right? even if they're working on a high
performance blockchain like you know you
saw the the the episode probably of bank
list like a few months ago where there
it was it was sort of Konyi and Bing
talking about and Lei talking about you
know oh we're rebuilding databases for
higher throughput performance systems
it's like yeah that's super important
you've got to do that but if you don't
address the networking layer you've got
a you know the Kevin Bower's famous
analogy you've got a Ferrari stuck in
traffic and just because that Ferrari
can go 220 mph doesn't mean it's going
220 mph. Um, and and that's kind of one
of the main pieces that we are trying to
get more people to understand. Uh, we're
trying to get more folks to think about.
The thing I kind of keep saying is like
the ambition of this industry is still
very small. The fact that people are
excited about 100,000 TPS or even a
million TPS and like think that we've
accomplished something at, you know,
10,000 TPS on Salana or, you know, on
some other networks. the ambition is
just way too small. Like if we're
actually if this you like the world
computer is like back in vogue, right?
Like ultrasound money's gone. The world
computer's back. Like it's great. I
think the world computer has an
incredible vision. The world computer
needs 10 million transactions per
second. And it doesn't need them through
a bunch of L2s that are all doing 400
transactions per second. It needs L2s
that are pushing a million transactions
per second. It needs the base layer to
probably scale up as well. Like there's
all of this type of stuff that the
minute you get into it, you're like,
"Oh, if we actually for a minute take
the rhetoric seriously." We are so far
away from any type of capacity. Even on
Salana and Sooie and like the fastest
blockchains out there, we're orders
we're probably 10 to 100 orders of
magnitude away from remotely being able
to address those type of needs and
demands.
And you can't get there if you don't
address the base layer. Like people
forget that like Facebook literally
wired up the Philippines and India with
a bunch of fiber so they could sell
people
ads. Like at some point these company
the all these big tech companies like
even the cloud providers that are like
oh we're just virtualized data centers
like we don't want to touch hardware.
They all own fiber nowadays too. Like
Netflix owns fiber.
like the public internet is an
incredible resource, but it is not built
for the type of scale and performance
that folks need from this type of stuff.
And so if we really want to start
competing with the banks, we really want
to start competing with these like
centralized like systems, you really
want permissionless, open, decentralized
AI to become real and not just a bunch
of
like kind of shitty reply bots on
Twitter. Like we actually need
connectivity between these things. Like
Microsoft is running terabytes of
connectivity between the data centers
they're building. Like talk to any
decentralized training AI company out
there and they're like, "Yeah, we waste
so much time on network transit. We
waste so much time on snapshot resyncing
on all these types of things." And so I
I think like the sexy thing to do is
always to rush to the new technology on
the application layer and try and build
something there. But you know, you got
to put in the hard work of like building
that low-level capacity. So, we're
hiring. This is a long way of saying
we're hiring. Uh, if you go to
double00.xyz, there's a whole jobs board
there. Um, and you know, if you are an
engineer working on a protocol and
you're inspired to say like we we really
need to start thinking about what
performance looks like when we hit
scale, um, let's talk, right? Like
the0ero started as a Salana first
project, but we're in no means a Salana
only project. We're nailing Salana first
because the need is there with Fire
Dancer. The product market fit is there.
uh with Salana as well and you know as
we go faster and faster like Salana's
the hardest one if we can nail Salana
first everything else is downhill from
there. The only thing I was gonna I was
going to say is like I think the like
the energy space is super interesting
and like it goes handinhand with this.
The challenge is it is regulated up the
wazoo and one of the nice things about
private networking is it's a much more
regulatory clear space. Um, and so it it
feels like it's an area like Godspeed
Meltum, like go go hard on nuclear for 5
years and like maybe someday we'll be
able to build like decentralized power
systems. I think Sourceful's been doing
some interesting work on that with
battery backups mostly in Europe. But
the nice thing about the networking
layer is it's an area where there's
enough regulatory clarity that it can be
solved today. And that's kind of why I
think that's like it. I wouldn't call it
the lowhanging fruit because it's a very
ambitious, difficult, technical project,
but it is the one that feels like it's
the next thing we have to nail. Like
we've kind of fixed the compute problem
in blockchain. The networking problem is
the next one.
Yep. Awesome. Cool. Thank you so much,
Austin, for joining. It was great
talking to you. Yeah. Thanks, guys.
Appreciate it. Have a good night. Bye.
Bye. Bye. Bye. Right.